topics: Soil, Martinaise, code

# Soil

## A low-level VM

When implementing [my programming language Martinaise](https://github.com/MarcelGarus/martinaise), I was faced with a difficult challenge.
I wanted to achieve both of these goals simultaneously:

- *Performance*:
  Martinaise programs should be (nearly) as efficient as writing the corresponding machine code.
  Until now, this was achieved by allowing the developer to write functions in platform-specific assembly.
- *Platform Independence*:
  All Martinaise code should be platform independent.
  So, just writing assembly doesn't work.

The solution is pretty obvious:

> Any problem in computer science can be solved with another layer of indirection. \[...\]

So, I invented Soil.

Similar to fantasy consoles such as [PICO-8](https://www.lexaloffle.com/pico-8.php), Soil is a specification for a VM.
It is on a similar abstraction level as existing CPU instruction sets:
There are registers, memory, and instructions.

- *Registers* have sane names (`text:a`, `text:b`, `text:c`, `text:d`, `text:e`, `text:f`, stack pointer `text:sp`, status register `text:st`).
- *Instructions* are low-level and operate on registers.
  Soil follows the tradition of RISC instruction sets – there are only a few simple instructions that compose instead of many specialized instructions.
  For example, jumping based on whether a value is negative is encoded using these instructions:
  
  ```soil
  cmp a 0
  isless
  cjump label
  ```
- *Memory* has a fixed size.
  Code can just access any address within that range.

Because Soil is low-level, it's easy to write interpreters.
There already exist a few implementations written in C, Zig, Dart, Rust, and x86\_64 assembly.

Now, I can write Martinaise functions in platform-independent Soil assembly:

```soil
fun memcopy(from: Address, to: Address, amount: Int) asm {
  moveib a 8  add a sp load a a | from
  moveib b 16 add b sp load b b | to
  moveib c 24 add c sp load c c | amount
  moveib e 1
  cmp a b isless cjump .right_to_left
  .left_to_right: ..loop:
  move st c isequal cjump .done
  loadb d a storeb b d
  add a e add b e sub c e
  jump ..loop
  .right_to_left:
  add a c add b c sub a e sub b e | make a and b point to the last byte
  ..loop:
  move st c isequal cjump .done
  loadb d a storeb b d
  sub a e sub b e sub c e
  jump ..loop
  .done: ret
}
```

